Neuromodulation: Technology at the Neural Interface

Received: July 5,2011 Revised: October 12, 2011 Accepted: October 22, 2011

(onlinelibrary.wiley.com) DOI: 10.1111/j.1525-1403.2011.00414.x

A History of Intraspinal Analgesia, a Small and
Personal Journey

Elliot S. Krames, MD

Introduction: There is a large and robust literature on the spinal use of opioids and non-opioids alike, but unless one is my age
and older, very few persons know how we got here. This small history offering tells us how we got to where we are today regarding
the science, clinical uses, and management of intraspinal analgesia.

Methods: | have reviewed the literature bases of Google Scholar and the National Library of Medicine using the key words:
history, opium, spinal analgesia, spinal morphine, intrathecal (IT), opioid receptors, endogenous opioids, IT delivery of opioids, and
IT side-effects/complications.

Results: In this personal review of the history of intraspinal analgesia, | relate my own early and later experiences of the science
and clinical uses of intraspinal morphine, other opioids, and non-opioids alike to a historical context. This review outlines a rather
small history of opium, the historical use of opium and its various compounds, and the search for and answer to the question, “why
was the poppy created for wondrous medicinal uses for mankind?" This search led to the discovery of endogenous opioid like
chemicals, the discovery of opiate receptors for these endogenous opioids, the first uses of intraspinal opioids in animal models
and man, and, finally, our understanding of the appropriate and inappropriate clinical uses of intraspinal analgesia. Within this
paper, | acknowledge the works of my colleagues and the “heroes” who have laid the foundation for our understanding of
intraspinal analgesia.

Conclusions: The history of the use of intraspinal analgesia is rich and guides us to advance the science and clinical use of
intraspinal analgesia without reinventing the wheel.

Keywords: analgesia, endogenous opioids, epidural analgesia, epidural opioids intraspinal, history, intrathecal analgesia, intra-

thecal opioids, opioid receptors

Conflict of Interest: Dr. Krames owns stock in Medtronic, Inc., and is a consultant for Codman/J and J.

INTRODUCTION

| have been injecting opiates/opioids into the spinal canal, either
epidurally or intrathecally, since 1979 for the care of my patients in
pain. It is my understanding and probably deluded belief that | was
the first physician west of the Mississippi to do this, and my early
adoption of the intraspinal delivery of opioid-like drugs was based
on the scientific and clinical works performed by the many pioneers
who came before me. What follows in this paper is my personal
journey regarding the use of the intraspinal delivery of opioids and
the story of these pioneers, the early adopters of this therapy, and
my many colleagues who have added to our understandings of
intraspinal drug delivery for the relief of both cancer and nonmalig-
nant pain syndromes. The history is actually much larger than this
offering, and no one should mistake this condensed history for a
structured review; | will only present here some of the numerous
papers that were written on the topic. | also will mention only a few
of the researchers, both clinical and scientific, that have added to
our knowledge base of the chronic use of intraspinal opioids. For
those authors of important papers that | do not mention, please
accept my sincerest apologies and my sincerest thanks for your
contributions.

Although this paper is not about opium, its derivatives, or opiates,
it is also as much about the search for “why the opium poppy was
created for good of mankind” as it is of our journey to refine the

clinical use of this intraspinal delivery. This paper is a very small
history of that search and how that search laid the foundation for
the use of our present understandings of intraspinal analgesia.

OPIUM, A CONDENSED HISTORY

Opium or “poppy tears” (lachrymal papaveris) is the dried latex
obtained from the opium poppy (Papaver somniferum). The use of
this latex and the plant itself has a long human history and probably
predates history. It is widely believed that cultivation of opium
poppies was used for ritual purposes and dates back to at least the
Neolithic Age (New Stone Age) (1). The opium poppy was known to
be cultivated in lower Mesopotamia (Fig. 1). The Sumerians referred
to it as Hul Gil (2), the “joy plant,’ and passed its secrets to the
Assyrians who, in turn, passed it on to the Babylonians, who, in turn,
would pass their knowledge onto the Egyptians (3). Opium is men-
tioned in the Ebers Papyrus (4), an Egyptian medical papyrus dating

Address correspondence to: Elliot S. Krames, MD, Pacific Pain Treatment Center,
2000 Van Ness Avenue, Suite 402, San Francisco, CA 94109, USA. Email:
krames118@gmail.com

Pacific Pain Treatment Center, San Francisco, CA, USA

www.neuromodulationjournal.com

2012 International Neuromodulation Society

Neuromodulation 2012; 15: 172-193
