Pain Physician: Guidelines Issue 2019; 22:$1-S74

considered causative (349). The review also noted that the
majority of postoperative complications were very few,
but included pain post-procedure (3.9%), and pain due to
continued degeneration of the joint (3.8%) (349).

12.0 Guipance For RESPONSIBLE, SAFE,
anpD Errective Use or BioLocics

The current body of evidence on the use of biolog-
ics for the spine is limited. Previous systematic literature
reviews, such as the 2015 review by Nourissat et al (350)
reiterate the lack of many well-designed RCTs regard-
ing PRP use in the most common tendinopathies’ and
suggest that while PRP treatment for acute or chronic
tendinopathy is more beneficial than standard non-
intervention techniques of NSAIDs and rest, it should
be considered after failure of ultrasound-guided corti-
costeroid injection into the specific tendon.

The variation of follow-up for the studies has
ranged from 6 weeks to 3 years before conclusions
were drawn. Of the studies reviewed, there has been
a demonstration of benefit with the initial injection/in-
jection series that can last from 6 months to 24 months.
Studies requiring a repeat of the injection series after
24 months should be conducted to determine the maxi-
mum duration of time that can remain between series.

The lack of standardization of methodology and
analysis is a handicap to the ability to reproduce the
same models or make declarative recommendations.
Since the factors at play in healing and regeneration
are still unknown, clinicians continue to test new com-
binations, contributing to the heterogeneity in compo-
sition, techniques and outcomes (350-353).

In regard to cost, corticosteroid injections are
cheaper than PRP and are the current standard of care
for chronic conditions of joint degeneration. For this
reason and in consistency with current guidelines from
musculoskeletal interventional pain management, and
national guidelines as listed in Table 19 (351), PRP is
considered in patients after corticosteroids fail, or are
deemed no longer appropriate for corticosteroid use.
This may however, change depending on availability of
more robust data on safety and long-term effectiveness
of biologics when compared to corticosteroids.

13.0 ConcLusion

Both PRP and MSCs are used autogenously to sup-
plement the healing process. Their natural properties
are being discovered, including functional strengths and
limitations. The guidelines presented have reviewed
studies that both confirm and refute current uses of

these biologics. In general, PRP is a concentration of in-
flammatory mediators and growth factors that comple-
ment healing in injured tissues. Biologics are considered
by many to be a more economic and expedited healing
approach and are becoming a reasonable alternative
to patients that fail standard of care treatments. Based
on the available literature, treatments for lumbar discs,
facet and sacroiliac joints are performed in conjunction
with a definitive diagnosis, and after the patient has
tried and failed conservative therapy. The published
studies have reported the results of single injection
biologic use on chronic pathology which has provided
short-term relief. PRP has been the most commonly
utilized biologic within the lumbar spine.

The survival of the clinical use of biologics de-
pends on the standardization of their use, the con-
sistency of outcomes, and on the documentation of
an overall decrease in healthcare costs. This can be
achieved by the publication of high-quality stud-
ies which will increase the predictability in the use
of biologic therapy. These efforts, on behalf of our
patients and to ensure the future of Regenerative
Medicine, will require dedication on the part of all
stakeholders to move the science and technology of
biologic therapy forward.

AAcKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors wish to thank Tonie M. Hatton and
Diane E. Neihoff, transcriptionists, for their assistance
in preparation of this manuscript. We would like to
thank the editorial board of Pain Physician for review
and criticism in improving the manuscript.

Disclosures
Funding: There was no external funding in the
preparation of this manuscript.

Author Affiliations

‘Dr. Navani is Medical Director, Comprehensive Spine &

Sports Center, Campbell, CA, and Adjunct Clinical

Associate Professor, Stanford University School of

Medicine, Stanford, CA.

2Dr. Manchikanti is Medical Director of the Pain Manage-

ment Center of Paducah, Paducah, KY, and Clinical

Professor, Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medi-

cine, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY.

3Dr. Albers is Director of Research, Radiology Research

and Consultation, Sacramento, CA.

‘Dr. Latchaw is a Professor of Radiology, Department of
Radiology, UC-Davis Medical Center, Sacramento,

S60

www.painphysicianjournal.com
